
Chassidus
Basics
Dictionary

Arranged by: Rabbi Benyomin Walters
Contents
I.	General Concepts	6
A.	The Branches of Chassidus	6
1.	Avodah – עבודה	7
2.	Haskalah – השכלה	9
3.	Havanah – הבנה	11
4.	Hisbonenus – התבוננות	12
II.	Avodah concepts	13
A.	The Soul	13
1.	Nefesh – נפש	13
2.	Nefesh HaBehamis – נפש הבהמית	14
3.	Nefesh HaElokis – נפש האלקית	15
4.	Five Soul Levels – נר"נ ח"י	16
B.	Anatomy of the Soul	18
5.	Etzem HaNefesh – עצם הנפש	19
6.	Kochos HaNefesh – כחות הנפש	21
7.	Levushei HaNefesh – לבושי הנפש	22
C.	Avodas Hashem	23
1.	Ahavas Hashem – אהבת ה'	23
2.	Yiras Hashem – יראת ה'	23
3.	Kabbalas Ol – קבלת עול	23
4.	Mesiras Nefesh – מסירת נפש	23
5.	Shtus (of kedusah and kelipah) – שטות (דקדושה ודלעו"ז)	24
6.	Taam Va'daas – טעם ודעת	24
7.	Pnimiyus – פנימיות	24
8.	Chitzoniyus – חיצוניות	24
III.	Haskalah Concepts	25
1.	Seder Hishtalshelus – סדר השתלשלות	25
2.	Atzmus – עצמות	30
3.	Tzimtzum – צמצום	31
4.	Reshimu – רשימו	32
5.	Kav (va’chut) – קב (וחוט)	32
6.	Igulim – עיגולים	33
7.	Yosher – יושר	34
8.	Adam Kadmon (A"K) – אדם קדמון (א"ק)	34
9.	Atzilus, Beriyah, Yetzirah, Asiyah (ABY"A) – אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)	35
10.	Sefirah, 10 Sefiros – ספירה, עשר ספירות	36
11.	Partzuf(im) – פרצוף, פרצופים	38
12.	Parsa / Masach – פרסא / מסך	39
13.	Kelipah – קליפה	39

מפתח ערכים
אדם קדמון	34
אהבת ה'	23
אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)	35
בריאה – ראה אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)
הבנה	11
השכלה	9
התבוננות	12
חוט – ראה קב וחוט
חיצונים – ראה קליפה
חיצוניות	24
טעם ודעת	24
יושר	34
יצירה – ראה אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)
יראת ה'	23
כחות הנפש	21
לבושים – ראה לבושי הנפש
לבושי הנפש	22
מסירת נפש	23
מסך – ראה פרסא / מסך
נפש	13
נפש האלקית	15
נפש הבהמית	14
נר"נ ח"י	16
סדר השתלשלות	25
סטרא אחרא – ראה קליפה
ספירה, עשר ספירות	36
עבודה	7
עיגולים	33
עצם הנפש	19
עצמות	30
עשי' – ראה אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)
עשר ספירות – ראה ספירה, עשר ספירות
פנימיות	24
פרסא / מסך	39
פרצופים	38
צמצום	31
קב (וחוט)	32
קבלת עול	23
קליפה	39
קליפת נוגה – ראה קליפה
רשימו	32
שטות (דקדושה ודלעו"ז)	24
שלש קליפות הטמאות – ראה קליפה

General Concepts
The Branches of Chassidus
Chassidus Chabad divides into three general branches, known as (1) Avodah, (2) Haskalah, and (3) Havanah. Each of these branches is based on Hisbonenus. 
In simple terms, these branches are: (1) Understanding yourself (Avodah), (2) Understanding G-d (Haskalah), and (3) Understanding Torah and mitzvos (Havanah). 
Each of these requires a form of in-depth study known as Hisbonenus to master them.
Avodah – עבודה
Entry: עבודה, Avodah
Definition: 
1. Divine service, especially davening. 
2. Working on one’s character; self-improvement. 
3. Literally: Anything requiring focused effort; work, toil, labor.
Mashal: 
1. A farmer plowing and sowing a field (עבודת האדמה). This is work that cultivates hidden potential. 
2. Tanning hides to make leather (עיבוד עורות). This is creative work that transforms a material into something new.
Personal Nimshal: 
Any time we work to improve, this is Avodah. We work on improving the quantity and quality of our good midos, Torah study, davening, and mitzvos. 
Specifically, there are two stages in Avodah:
The first step is like a farmer working on his field—he uses the dirt to grow food, but the earth remains earth. So too, at first we cultivate and reveal the hidden potential of our neshamah (our nefesh elokis); yet, our body (and nefesh habehamis) remains the same and desires physical things. For example, at first we develop good manners (derech eretz) so that we don’t act like an animal. Then, we use our bodies and talents to serve Hashem through Torah and mitzvos. When we are involved in holy things, our Neshamah shines and we are inspired, but later when we go back to our physical life, we still desire the same physical pleasures.
The second step is like a tanner, who transforms raw hides into beautiful leathers. So too, we transform the nature of our body (and our nefesh habehamis and yetzer hara). When we work very hard to serve Hashem, and have self-sacrifice (mesiras nefesh) for Torah and mitzvos—especially for helping others (tzedakah and ahavas yisrael)—this transforms our nature, so that even our body and animal soul want to serve Hashem. 
Global Nimshal: 
The goal of creation is to make the word into a home for Hashem. This happens in two steps: 
First, Hashem plants G-dly souls in the world like seeds. Through Torah and mitzvos, these seeds grow and flourish. 
Second, when we go out into the world, we refine and transform the world itself into a G-dly place. This work will be complete when Moshiach comes and the entire world with all of the nations will be transformed to serve Hashem together.
Sources: 
Kuntres Inyan Hatefilah, Likkutei Diburim (basar, nefesh), Habaim Yashreish. Letter in back of Derech Chaim.
Haskalah – השכלה
Entry: השכלה, Haskalah
Definition: 
1. Deep study, especially about G-d’s Unity. 
2. Mastering the intellectual or theoretical side of Chassidus. 
3. Literally: Learning, education, or enlightenment.
Mashal: 
A person needs food to live. A child needs simple milk, and is harmed by adult food. An adult needs bread and meat, and will wither away drinking only milk. Furthermore, a person may be sitting at a table full of delicacies, yet go hungry because he has no fork and knife to eat with.
Personal Nimshal: 
There are six constant mitzvos that apply to all Jews at all times, and can only be fulfilled through learning about Hashem: (1) To believe in G-d; (2) Not to believe in any other deity; (3) To recognize His Unity; (4) To love Him; (5) To fear Him; and (6) Not to go astray after the temptations of the heart and vision of the eyes. 
Chassidus collects and explains these teachings so that everyone can understand on his or her level. 
The Torah, and Chassidus in particular, is compared to food for the soul. Just as a baby can only eat milk, but an adult needs bread and meat, so it is with the soul’s food. A child’s belief in G-d is proper by imagining G-d as a big, strong man, with powerful arms, something like his father, but even stronger. But for an adult, such an idea contradicts the basic principle of our faith, that G-d is neither a body, nor a form in a body, and so forth. As we grow, we must “update the files” to match our new maturity and ability.
Our sages and Rebbeim have prepared for us the finest of delicacies. Yet, just as we need a fork and knife to eat, certain basic ideas are the tools we use to understand and apply these teachings to our lives. These ideas are the Haskalah of Chassidus.
Global Nimshal: 
Hashem’s Essence and nature are far beyond anything in creation. Even to say that G-d is too deep to understand is ridiculous, like saying an idea is too deep to hold in your hand. We must realize this and approach Hashem with humility.
Yet, Hashem also chooses to limit and lower Himself into creation. He gives us the ability to connect to Him through our minds and hearts by learning Torah and fulfilling mitzvos. This is a great gift, and is part of Hashem’s plan of making a dirah b’tachtonim. He desires that we have a person connection to Him even in our limited human experience.
Sources: 
Kuntres haHispaalus, hakdamah; Tanya, chs. 5, . The Letter & The Spirit, vol. 2, pp. 50-51.
Havanah – הבנה
Entry: הבנה, Havanah
Definition: 
1. Understanding the reasons for the mitzvos. 
2. Deeper insights into Torah based on the perspective of Chassidus. 
3. Literally: Understanding.
Mashal: 
The soul completely changes the body, making it a living thing. A body may be complete, but without the soul it has no life. The soul completely transforms every aspect of the body, yet it does not change or add anything physically; it merely imbues everything with life.
Personal Nimshal: 
Our religious observance of Torah and mitzvos is like a body. The body may be complete yet lacking life. Chassidus brings new life to everything in Torah and mitzvos, by imbuing it with understanding. Specifically, Chassidus gives us the realization that we have a G-dly soul that is our truest identity, and the understanding of how Torah and mitzvos expresses this G-dly identity.
Global Nimshal: 
Hashem reveals Himself in many ways—beyond the world and in the world and in each one of us. Every aspect of Torah and mitzvos is designed to reveal and express a unique aspect of Hashem, and help refine a specific part of the world.
To bring Mashiach, we must understand the inner G-dly purpose of each mitzvah so that we can fulfill our mission of making a dirah b’tachtonim in the most complete and beautiful way.
Sources: 
Hisbonenus – התבוננות
Entry: התבוננות, Hisbonenus
Definition: 
1. In-depth study, especially about G-d’s Unity. 
2. Literally: In-depth learning, analysis, or contemplation.
Mashal: 
A person may be sitting at a table full of delicacies, yet go hungry because he has no fork and knife to eat with.
Personal Nimshal:
Our sages and Rebbeim have prepared for us the finest of delicacies. Yet, just as we need a fork and knife to eat, we need the right tools to understand and apply these teachings to our lives. The tools that we use to internalize (eat) Chassidus are the various forms of Hisbonenus.
There are three basic stages in Hisbonenus:
	•	Learn the material well. Review the piece a few times. Be sure that you see the flow and can summarize it in your own words. Writing an outline or flow-chart or summary can help.
	•	Before davening, think about the main point of the material, and think of ways that you can apply this idea to your life. What change in perspective does this maamar or sichah demand? How would I act differently if I lived according to this teaching?
	•	During davening, look for this theme in the words of davening. Commit to taking a small practical step to live this teaching as a way of improving your service of Hashem. 
Sources: 
Shaar HaYichud (Mitteler Rebbe) ch. 1; Hayom Yom, 20 Tamuz.

Avodah concepts
	•	The Soul
	•	Nefesh – נפש
Entry: נפש, Nefesh
Definition: 
1. Soul. 
2. The spiritual life-force of a thing. 
3. The spiritual form that directs and motivates the nature of a thing.
Everything in creation has a soul that gives it life—even a rock. The soul is the unique combination of spiritual forces that give each creature its nature and properties. For example, even the color, texture, and chemical properties of a rock are all dictated by spiritual forces, which are the soul of that object. 
More refined creatures reveal their spiritual life force to a greater degree. Lowest are inanimate objects, next plants, then animals, and finally people. Man has the special ability of rising beyond creation and gaining an additional G-dly soul. This extra soul was given as an inheritance to the Jewish People at the time of the Giving of the Torah (and is granted to a convert through conversion.)
Just as the soul is the true essence of every being, G-d Himself is compared to the soul of all of reality, guiding and forming all of creation.
Sources: 
Tanya, Shaar HaYichud VeHaEmunah ch. 1, 7. Likkutei Amarim ch. 38.

Nefesh HaBehamis – נפש הבהמית
Entry: נפש הבהמית, Nefesh HaBehamis
Definition: 
1. The Animal Soul. 
2. The body’s drives and desires; anything motivated by survival instincts.
Mashal: 
An animal is motivated only by survival instincts. Some animals are rough like an ox, while some are timid like a sheep. Some are mighty like a lion, and others are a sly like a fox. The strategies and nature of each animal may be different, but the basic drives are the same—all they desire is to eat and reproduce.
Yet, we can harness animals for great benefit. For example, we can harness an ox to a plough, using its great strength to benefit the world.
Personal Nimshal:
Each of us shares the basic drive to care for our body’s needs. We all want to live, and to live we must eat and drink, and so on. No matter how smart or sophisticated a person may be, he is like an animal so long as his ultimate goal remains only his body’s needs.
Yet, we can harness our body and its nature for the service of Hashem. 
Sources: 
Tanya, ch. 1; HaYom Yom, 23 Sivan.

Nefesh HaElokis – נפש האלקית
Entry: נפש האלקית, Nefesh HaElokis
Definition: 
1. The G-dly Soul. 
2. A spark of G-d within every Jew that motivates him to connect to G-d and reveal G-dliness in the world. 
3. The G-dly drive to know truth and do good for its own sake.
Mashal: 
	•	A glassblower blowing with force. The breath in his lungs flows through a tube to expand the glass.
	•	A child’s entire body—from his head to his feet—is created from a drop of semen that originates in the father’s brain. Therefore, the child’s entire body is guided by child’s brain, which can learn to emulate the father.
	•	A king lacks nothing—all of his physical needs are provided for in abundance, and he has all of the honor and glory and power anyone could desire. Yet, he desires to learn truth for its own sake, and wishes to rule justly for the sake of bringing goodness to his country.
Personal Nimshal:
	•	Each of us has a soul that is one with G-d, like the breath in the lungs. This soul will expand our G-dly awareness and influence in our body and the world, as long as we don’t block the tube with sins. But even if the tube is blocked, our essential spark remains intact in its source (the breath in the lungs).
	•	Every Jew comes from G-d’s wisdom. Yet, some Jews become great sages (head) and others simple people (feet). By connecting to tzaddikim and chachamim, who teach us Torah (G-d’s wisdom), we reveal and develop our G-dly soul.
	•	Each of us has a spark of G-dliness, which is beyond the world. This part of us desires only G-dliness and has no interest in worldly pleasures. Quite the contrary—a prince or princess forced to live in a stable like an animal is torturous. So too, our G-dly soul is only happy when we are involved in knowing Hashem and spreading G-dliness through Torah and mitzvos.
Sources: 
Likutei Amarim, ch. 2; Kuntres Inyana shel Toras HaChassidus, ch. ???
Five Soul Levels – נר"נ ח"י
Entry: נרנח"י (נפש, רוח, נשמה, חיה, יחידה), NeRaN ChaY (Nefesh, Ruach, Neshamah, Chaya, Yechidah)
Definition: 
	•	נפש, Nefesh: Soul; enlivening force. Literally, resting air. Lowest of the five soul levels; it enlivens the body with basic biological life and the ability to move and grow.
	•	רוח, Ruach: Spirit. Literally, blowing wind. The second of the five soul levels; responsible for the senses, reactivity, and emotion.
	•	נשמה, Neshamah: Soul. Literally, breath (in the lungs). The third of the five soul levels; responsible for intellect and conscious (analytical) thought.
	•	חיה, Chayah: Living. The forth of the five soul levels; responsible for desire and faith. Also the source of a person’s potential abilities, talents, creativity, intelligence, personality, and taste.
	•	יחידה, Yechidah: Singular. The fifth and highest of the five soul levels; the person’s essence, responsible for identity, free-choice, and the ability to overcome challenges. This stage is the essence of the lower four soul levels, which it activates, directs, and sometimes changes.

Soul Level
Literal Translation
Represents
1
Nefesh
Soul
Still Air
Action
Life-force
2
Ruach
Spirit
Moving Wind
Emotions
Senses
3
Neshamah
Soul
Breath (in lungs)
Intellect
Consciousness
4
Chayah
Living

Desire
Faith
5
Yechidah
Singular

Identity
Choice
Mashal:
Each level of the soul corresponds to a different level of excitement. The following examples are the five levels of the animal soul’s attachment to physical pleasures, like money.
Nefesh
A person hears that someone else won a lottery. He appreciates the importance and value. He wishes he was the winner, but isn’t really moved, because it doesn’t relate to him personally.
Ruach
A hears that he won a lottery. He is very excited in anticipation of what he will be able to do with the money.
Neshamah
Someone actually enjoys benefit from something, like from spending money he earned.
Chayah
A person is so excited about his business, that he tells everyone about it. His mind automatically connects everything that he sees and hears to his passion. This passion is his main pleasures in life.
Yechidah
His very identity is attached to something to his fortune to the point that he would rather die than lose it.
Personal Nimshal:
Every Jew has all five soul levels, and we may have flashes of inspiration from every level. Yet, we are obligated to do Hisbonenus to develop our spiritual sensitivity and maturity in a lasting way. The five levels of the soul correspond to five rungs on the ladder of Avodah.
Nefesh
He believes that Torah is true, and that G-dliness important. When he hears stories of tzaddikim, he wishes he could be like that and feels a little guilty, but isn’t inspired to do anything, because he doesn’t see how it is practical for him to achieve.
Ruach
He believes that G-dliness is personally attainable, and is motivated and excited to learn and grow in Avodas Hashem.
Neshamah
Experiences a taste of G-dliness after learning Chassidus and Hisbonenus. Starts to see how Chassidus offers a new way to look at some aspect of life, and how this shift improves his life. 
Chayah
Fully masters and internalized the G-dly approach to life taught in Chassidus. Is filled with passion to bring this approach to the world. Gdliness becomes his main passion in life.
Yechidah
His very identity is attached to G-dliness to the point that everything else is viewed only as tool for G-dliness. He has complete mesiras nefesh for G-dliness.

Sources: 
Kuntres Hahispaalus. Kuntres HaAvodah.

Anatomy of the Soul
Introduction: 
Every soul, both the Nefesh HaElokis and the Nefesh HaBehamis, has three basic parts: 
	•	עצם, Essence: The soul’s essence and identity. 
	•	כוחות, Abilities: The soul’s character and abilities. 
	•	לבושים, Garments: The soul’s external expression.
The Nefesh HaElokis and the Nefesh HaBehamis battle for control of each of these parts of you. How will you define your Self? How will you understand and feel? How will you act? Each of these areas can be dominated by your G-dly soul or by your body’s drives.
Etzem HaNefesh – עצם הנפש
Entry: עצם הנפש, Etzem HaNefesh
Definition: 
1. The essence of the soul. 
2. A person’s identity; inner self. 
3. The source of our free-choice, personal style and taste, creativity, and ability to solve problems and overcome challenges.
Mashal:
	•	A parent and a child share an essential bond. The parent’s love for a child is essential. The parents love the child for who the child is, not for what the child can do.
Parents don’t love their child because he does well. Rather, because they love their child they teach the child to express his nature and potential.
	•	Oil is a sort of distilled essence. It can be extracted from rocks (petroleum), plants (vegetable oil), and animals (fats). Oil has the peculiar nature that it separates and floats above liquids, yet it spreads into and permeates solids.
Personal Nimshal:
	•	The essence of our soul is a literal piece of G-d (חלק אלק ממעל ממש). Therefore, each of us is like Hashem’s child. Hashem loves every Jew just because they One with Him, not because of anything we do to merit that love.
A Jew is not valued because he does Torah and mitzvos. Rather, because Hashem loves us, He gives us Torah and mitzvos to help us develop and express our true G-dly nature.
	•	Our G-dly essence and identity lies at the core of everything that we do. The nature of identity is that it is beyond everything we do—meaning that we are not defined by our successes and failures. On the other hand, we express our identity in everything that we do.
These two stages of rising above and then permeating everything are called Teshuvah and Maasim Tovim.
Finding our identity requires rising above and letting go of all of our worldly (and even spiritual) attachments to find our true G-dly self. This is called Teshuvah. Then, once we realize that our G-dly identity is beyond and above everything, we can properly express this identity in everything we do—Maasim Tovim.
Sources: 
Tanya, ch. 2; Kuntres Inyana shel Toras Hachassidus; Maamar Yafa Shaah Achas, Kuntreisim Admur HaEmtzai.

Kochos HaNefesh – כחות הנפש
Entry: כוחות הנפש, Kochos HaNefesh
Definition: 
1. The (ten) traits or abilities of the human soul. These traits correspond to the ten sefiros. 
2. A person’s individual character, based on the balance of their soul’s abilities and traits.
Mashal:
The soul itself is beyond the body; yet the soul can only interact with the world through the body’s organs. For example, the eye lets the soul see the physical world. The brain and heart let the soul think and feel physical thoughts and emotions. The hands and feet let the soul move and interact with physical objects. 
The body needs the soul to give it life. The soul needs the body to connect with the world.
Personal Nimshal:
The essence of our soul has unlimited choice and creativity. The soul’s “body” is intellect and emotions. These abilities are more limited and specialized than the soul’s essence. None of these abilities fully capture our identity—who we really are. Yet, we need these tools to interact with the world.
A sense of identity gives life and enjoyment to how we think and feel. Yet, we can only share our inner self with others and make the world a better place by using and mastering our minds and hearts.
Sources: 
Likkutei Amarim, ch. 2-3; Hemshech Ayin Beis, beginning.

Levushei HaNefesh – לבושי הנפש
Entry: לבושים (של הנפש), Levushim (shel HaNefesh)
Definition: 
1. The three abilities of thought, speech, and action, which are the external expression of soul to others. 
2. The external spiritual and physical circumstances (such as education, training, physical health, and so on) that effect one’s ability to interact with the world.
Mashal:
	•	The body needs clothing for protection from the elements. 
	•	Clothing can also express honor or beauty, such as a professional uniform or jewelry.
Personal Nimshal:
	•	The soul itself is spiritual and cannot interact directly with the world. It needs to dress up in “clothes” first. These are thought, speech, and action. The G-dly soul expresses itself in Torah and mitzvos. The animal soul expresses itself by thinking, talking, and doing things to get what the body needs and wants.
	•	Not all clothing is purely functional. Some clothes bring honor and beauty to a person. So too, our experiences don’t only express our soul, they also enrich our soul. For example, mitzvos don’t just express the soul’s understanding and love for Hashem. These G-dly experiences actually give us a deeper understanding, and connect us to Hashem in ways that go beyond understanding.
On the other hand, negative experiences and habits can strengthen the animal soul beyond its nature.
This is one reason why our chinuch and environment are so important to our spiritual development. The experiences we have affect us very deeply.
Sources: 
Likkutei Amarim, ch. 5-6; Torah Ohr, Vayeira, Pasach Eliyahu; Maamarim Meluket, Vayishlach Yehoshua, 28 Sivan 5736.

Avodas Hashem
	•	Ahavas Hashem – אהבת ה'
Definition: 
1. Serving G-d out of an intrinsic appreciation of G-d and G-dliness, its beauty and joy. 
2. The desire to know the truth, just because it is true, and to do what is right, just because it is right. 
3. Literally: Love of G-d.
Yiras Hashem – יראת ה'
Definition: 
1. Serving G-d for extrinsic motives: appreciating how serving G-d will impact your life and the world, and how rebelling against Him, G-d forbid, will negatively impact your life and the world. 
2. Motivation based on reward and punishment. 
3. Literally: Fear of G-d.
Kabbalas Ol – קבלת עול
Definition: 
1. Accepting to do G-d’s will in action without regard for any challenges. 
2. Any sense of duty and responsibility, whether to G-d or to others, that compels you to fulfill your duty. 
3. Often used to mean unquestioning compliance to an authority figure. 
4. Literally: Accepting a yoke.
Mesiras Nefesh – מסירת נפש
Definition: 
1. Complete devotion to Hashem to the point of self-sacrifice. 
2. A total shift of one’s identity, where G-d, an ideal, or another person is more essential to one’s self than one’s own body. 
3. Literally: transfer of soul, giving up one’s life.
Shtus (of kedusah and kelipah) – שטות (דקדושה ודלעו"ז)
Definition: 
1. Irrational behavior, for good or for bad. 
2. The basic assumptions and beliefs at the core of one’s value system, which defy logic and reason. 
3. Literally: foolishness, deviance, leaning.
Taam Va'daas – טעם ודעת
Definition: 
1. Logic and reason. 
2. A model created in your mind to help you understand reality and guide your choices. This model, however, will always be limited and tinted by your perspective and biases. 
3. Literally: Logic and knowledge, reason and opinion.
Pnimiyus – פנימיות
Definition: 
1. Motivation and decisions flowing from your core identity, not influenced by what others think, or external concerns. 
2. Intrinsic motivation, such as curiosity and a sense of justice. 
3. Literally: personal, inwardness, internal.
Chitzoniyus – חיצוניות
Definition: 
1. Motivation and decisions focused on what others think, or compromising to external pressures. 
2. Extrinsic motivation, such as reward and punishment. 
3. Literally: impersonal (usually in the sense of faking or pretending), outward, external.
 Haskalah Concepts
	•	Seder Hishtalshelus – סדר השתלשלות
Entry: סדר השתלשלות, Seder Hishtalshelus
Definition: 
1. The process of creation. 
2. The gradual diminishing of G-d’s light to create all of spiritual and physical existence, and then to be revealed within this creation. 
3. Literally: The Order of Progression.
Basic Seder Hishtalshelus
Chassidus gives a basic Seder Hishtalshelus for beginners:
Originally, there was “Him and His name alone.” That is, the Essence of the Infinite One blessed be He and His light and ray, which are called His name. Everything was included in His essence in an infinite manner and it filled the “empty place.” Then, Gd contracted His light and left only an impression in this void. Then, from this impression, He drew forth a thin line of light into the empty place first as ten circles and then ten straight sefiros. 
The light before the contraction is called the Upper Purity and the first circle of light at the beginning of the line is called the Lower Purity.
After this, the kingship of the Infinite contracted to become the crown of the Original Man. 
Then, from kingship of the Original Man came the crown to ancient days. 
Then, from the kingship of long face came the crown to father and mother and from the kingship of father and mother came the crown to small face and from small face to female. 
Until, from the kingship of Emanation came the crown to Creation and so too from Creation to Formation and from Formation to Actualization. Finally arriving at the kingship of kingship of Actualization—the end of the entire progression.
Mashal:
	•	Before taking a trip by train one needs a map of the stations.
In former generations young men were not admitted to hear maamarim being delivered by the Rebbe of their generation. They first had to be familiar at least with the Seder Hishtalshelus, at least to know all of its stations…. Nowadays, when everyone is admitted, people ought to be grateful and should listen attentively. (Likkutei Dibburim 39 (2), 1)

	•	A chain contains many links, but they all act as a single unit. Tug the top and the bottom moves. Tug the bottom and the top moves.
Basic Hishtalshelus Reference Chart
#
Name of Stage
Soul – Body Metaphor
Language Metaphor
1
עצמות אור אין סוף
Atzmus Ohr Ein Sof
Essence of Infinite Light 

יחידה – the essence of your soul. 
Your inner Self, which transcends all forms and expressions, but contains them all and pervades them all. (Such as desire, intellect, emotion, thought, speech, and action.)
This includes taste and style.
Direct experience beyond expression.
(Inner Self of author or speaker.
Self-expression automatically present in language.)
Includes aspects that can be expressed.

2
צמצום
Tzimtzum
Contraction
Focused Choice. 
The ability of focusing and limiting the Self to one desire or expression.
Focus.
Limiting content of expression to something specific and conveyable.
3
רשימו
Reshimu
Impression
The aspect of Self left in one’s choices, giving an “impression” of one’s taste and style.
(As in making an “impression” on people.)
Symbol.
Power to hide or represent an idea in a symbol.
4
קו
Kav
Line
Flexible Choice.
Your ability to change, respond, assess, and interact.
Order.
Ability of symbols to express ideas by stringing them in a line.
5
רצון הקדום
Ratzon HaKadom
Original Desire (First Circle)
Your inner abstract desire for life, happiness and fulfillment.
Axiom.
The basic premise that is the foundation of all of the points made. The general view and approach.
6
עשר ספירות דעיגולים
Esser Sfirot D’Igulim
Ten Circle Sefiros
Your inner abstract desires for each of your ten faculties.
The subconscious.
Moral.
The essential points trying to be conveyed.
7
אדם קדמון
Adam Kadmon
Original Man (Straight Sefiros)
Self-image and world-view.
Interface of subconscious and conscious.
The association of the abstract inner desire to a concrete image based on the world. 
How you define yourself in terms of the world, and the world in terms of you.
Meaning.
The inner meaning of words, including metaphors, associations, and representation.
8
אצילות

Atzilus

Emanation

Your consciousness as expressed in your body. 
Conscious desires, intellect, and emotions and their physical expression in the organs.

Message.
The intent trying to be conveyed in language.

8.1
עתיק יומין
Atik Yomin
Ancient Days
Your fun leisure side.
Pleasure.
Fulfillment.
Expression of pleasure in language.
For example, a joke.
8.2
אריך אנפין
Arich Anpin
Long Face
Your big hopes, dreams, and desires side.
Desire.
Goals.
Expression of desire in language.
For example, “Please pass the salt.”
8.3
אבא
Aba
Father
Your creative and intuitive side.
Insight.
Intellect.
Expression of creativity and insight in language.
8.4
אימא
Ima
Mother
Your logical side.
Understanding.
Rationality.
Expression of logic and understanding in language.
8.5
זעיר אנפין
Zeir Anpin
Small Face
Your day-to-day personality side.
Emotions.
Responsiveness.
Expression of emotions in language.
8.6
נוקבא
Nukva
Female
Your expressive side.
Power of thought, speech, and action.
Expressiveness.
Expression of eloquence in language.

9
מסך
Masach
Curtain
Language Barrier.
The privacy of your consciousness, thoughts and emotions hiding them behind the curtain of your external expressions in speech and action.
Language Barrier.
The need to communicate through a medium.
10
בריאה
Briyah
Creation
Thought. 
Concept.

Thought Language.
Definition of the words.
Language as symbols for ideas.
11
יצירה
Yetzirah
Formation
Speech.
Form.

Spoken Language.
Sounds.
12
עשיה
Asiyah
Actualization
Action.

Written Language.
Ink on paper.
Etched in stone.

Sources: 
Shaar HaYichud, Mitteler Rebbe, ch. 7.

Atzmus – עצמות
Entry: עצמות, Atzmus; (עמצות אור אין סוף, Atzmus Ohr Ein Sof)
Definition: 
1. G-d’s Essence, which is the source of everything and yet is beyond any expression, revelation, or comparison. 
2. The true reality of a thing, beyond our limited perception and understanding of that thing. 
3. Literally: Essence or Self. (Essence of the Infinite Light.)
Mashal:
The essence of our soul (Yechidah) is our inner self and identity. This inner self is beyond anything we do. Not only can’t we explain who we are to others, we can’t even express it to ourselves. We can never know our self fully and the full limit of our potential. Yet, the essence is the source of all that we do, and everything we do expresses this self. 
Nimshal:
G-d is beyond the world and our understanding. Yet, as the Baal Shem Tov taught, “He is everything and everything is Him.” 
Therefore, we cannot limit G-d to any physical or spiritual form in creation. To do so would be idolatry. Yet, we can find G-d everywhere in creation—even the most mundane aspects of daily life.
Sources: 
Kuntres Inyana shel Toras Hachassidus, ch. ; Likkutei Dibburim IV, 7 Adar Sheini 5703.


Tzimtzum – צמצום
Entry: צמצום, Tzimtum
Definition: 
1. The complete concealment of G-d’s Infinite Light to make “space” for creation to exist. 
2. Any of the infinite stages that lessen or conceal G-d’s light to allow for the following stage to exist, all part of the process of creation. 
3. Literally: Contraction, lessening.
Mashal:
A true teacher understands his subject in a way that is completely beyond the student’s mind. It is not just that the teacher knows more information. Rather, the teacher sees things on a completely different level of refinement and maturity. For example, the teacher appreciates the intrinsic value of learning Torah. 
The child, on the other hand, only appreciates things that are tangible and benefit him personally—like candy. To make the child understand, the teacher must put aside his understanding and values. Only then can the teacher enter the child’s world and present the idea in terms that the child can relate to—that learning is good because you will earn candy.
Yet, although the child is too immature to appreciate it now, he is really tasting the enjoyment of learning for its own sake. As he grows he will become refined enough to appreciate how his teacher helped him cultivate his innate curiosity. He will then realize that the teacher’s there all along—he always loved to learn and grow for its own sake—it was just that this part of himself was hidden from his childish view.
Nimshal:
G-d is beyond the world and our understanding. Yet, as the Baal Shem Tov taught, “He is everything and everything is Him.” 
Therefore, we cannot limit G-d to any physical or spiritual form in creation. To do so would be idolatry. Yet, we can find G-d everywhere in creation—even the most mundane aspects of daily life. 
Now we see ourselves and the world as being incompatible with G-d. Yet, in the Time to Come we will look back and see how G-d was the true reality of the world and ourselves all along.
Sources: Kuntes Inyono Shel Toras Hachassidus, ch. ; Likkutei Dibburim IV, 7 Adar Sheini 5703.


Reshimu – רשימו
Definition:
1. The “impression” of the Ohr Ein Sof that remained after the first Tzimtzum. 
2. The revelation of Hashem’s infinite power of limitation. 
3. Literally: Impression.
Mashal:
In order to explain something to a child, a teacher must put his own understanding aside. The simple explanation seems to have no relationship to the teacher’s understanding. Yet, the teacher sees how his entire understanding is hidden there.
The teacher sees how the idea may be understood in many ways. Yet, he must limit the idea by choosing just one way to introduce the idea to the student. The student (at first) thinks that this is the only way to understand the idea. The teacher sees that this is just an example of many ways.
Nimshal:
So too, Hashem makes the world (and each of us) seem completely separate from Him. Yet, Hashem sees how the world (and each of us) are actually one with Him.
Hashem can choose to do anything. This world is just one way that He chose to reveal Himself. When we think the world has to be this way, it hides Hashem. When we see the world as an expression of Hashem’s choice, the world becomes a revelation of Him.
Kav (va’chut) – קב (וחוט)
Definition:
1. The finite “line” of the Ohr Ein Sof that shines back into creation after the light was completely removed by the Tzimtzum. 
2. The revelation of Hashem’s infinite ability revealed in a measured way within the limits of creation. 
3. Literally: Line.
Mashal:
Many points join to form a line, and many lines can form letters and words. Each dot of ink, or line, or even letter is too limited to reveal any meaning. Yet, by stringing many together (in a line of text) many dots join together and reveal whole ideas.
Nimshal:
Hashem is revealed in the world from the way He conducts the world. By uniting and guiding everything, patterns are revealed that express His wisdom and desire.
For example, miracles reveal that even within creation, Hashem is beyond the rules of nature. Similarly, the wisdom and consistency of nature reveal that the world runs according to the plan of a Creator. Thus, Hashem reveals a glimpse of His light even within the limited world.
Igulim – עיגולים
Definition:
1. The 10 “circular” sefiros, which surround all of creation and are revealed everywhere equally (Makif). 
2. The revelation of Hashem’s Essence the way He is, not limited to our perception or understanding. This is expressed in Emunah, beyond understanding. 
3. Literally: circles.
Mashal:
When a person plans something like a dream house, they use their mind and think about the world. Yet, their main concern is what they want—their self-expression—not to accomplish something practical in terms of the world. They may consult with architects and do a lot of planning, but this is a creative process dictated by what the person wants. Therefore, every detail expresses the person’s taste and style.
On the other hand, the house does not express the builder’s desire. He is only working for the money he makes for doing the job.
Nimshal:
The desire to reveal Hashem in the world (to make a Dirah B’tachtonim) views everything in the world as merely a vessel to express G-dliness. A person can be involved in the lowest, most physical aspects of life. Yet, when everything is viewed as a way to know Hashem, these physical things become just as G-dly as holy activities.
Accomplishing this depends on seeing G-dliness as our identity. When G-dliness is our life, then everything we do expresses G-dliness. On the other hand, if we view ourselves merely as workers, then we will only appreciate the benefits (payment) that we get from G-dliness.
Yosher – יושר
Definition:
1. The Ten “straight” sefiros, which are arranged into three lines in the form of a man. This revelation is limited according to the refinement of each level. 
2. The revelation of Hashem within our minds and hearts, according to our refinement and understanding. 
3. Literally: straight.
Mashal:
When building a home, each worker has his own job. The architect must know the entire plan, while the brick layer need only know where to lay his bricks.
Similarly, a person’s soul (consciousness) is reveal in each limb of the body according to the nature of that limb. The eye sees, the ear hears, the mind thinks, the heart feels, the foot walks.
Nimshal:
In order to bring G-dliness into our life, we have different mitzvos for each aspect of life. In addition, each person must understand and be inspired on their own level, based on their mind and heart. Some will have a very simple understanding, and others a much greater understanding. Similarly, inspiration will wax and wane according to one’s avodah.
Adam Kadmon (A"K) – אדם קדמון (א"ק)
Definition:
1. The general desire and plan that encompasses all of creation, also known as a “desire for a desire.” 
2. The vision of how the world will be when Mashiach comes, and especially how Bnei Yisrael will connect to Hashem at that time. 
3. Literally: Original Man.
Atzilus, Beriyah, Yetzirah, Asiyah (ABY"A) – אצילות, בריאה, יצירה, עשי' (אבי"ע)
Definition:
1. The four “worlds” are four general stages in the creative process, or four general layers of existence within every being. 
2. The four stages in developing a desire from self-expression to actual implementation.
3. Literally: Emanation, Creation, Formation, and Action.

Name
Translation
Mashal
Nimshal
Atzilus
Emanation
Desire to feel a certain way. For example, to be a good host.
The Sefiros (G-dliness limited to a form that can be revealed in creation).
Beriyah
Creation
Concept that can accomplish this desire. For example, to have a nice dining room to host events.
Torah and mitzvos (concept of what a G-dly world will look like).
Yetzirah
Formation
Detailed form of concept. For example, the dimensions of the room, what it will be made of, and how it will be decorated.
The outside world (details of creation to make a place where we can fulfill Torah).
Asiyah
Action
Actions necessary to make it happen. For example, the actual construction and decoration of the room. Then, the actual hosting of parties.
Human experience (living life according to Torah, and eventually experiencing G-dliness in the world).

Sefirah, 10 Sefiros – ספירה, עשר ספירות
Definition:
1. The limited ways that G-d reveals Himself in creation. 
2. The perception of Gd’s infinite reality as filtered through human limitation. 
3. Literally: radiance, narrator, number.

Name
Translation
Mashal
Nimshal
כתר
Kesser
Crown
Pleasure and Desire
Reality as an extension of G-d
חכמה
Chochmah
Wisdom
Creativity
Reality as transparent (bateil) to G-d
בינה
Binah
Understanding
Logic
Reality as diversity, where everything reveals G-d in a unique way
דעת
Daas
Knowledge
Personal interest, focus, relevance
Reality viewed through a limited perspective that creates a hierarchy, where some revelations are appreciated more than others
חסד
Chesed
Kindness
Love and giving
G-d revealed through creation from nothing
גבורה
Gevurah
Severity
Hate, fear, and withholding
G-d revealed through hiding himself (tzimtzum) so that we feel independent
תפארת
Tiferes
Beauty
Mercy, harmony
G-d revealed through miracles and Tzaddikim
נצח
Netzach
Victory
Overcoming obstacles, persevering
G-d revealed by our constant dependence on G-d to provide the needs of all life
הוד
Hod
Glory
Respect, gratitude, humility
G-d revealed through giving us our needs so dependably that we feel independent
יסוד
Yesod
Foundation
Commitment to a personal relationship
G-d revealed through Hashgacha Protis—relating to each of us individually according to our needs and efforts.
מלכות
Malchus
Kingship
Responsibility, commitment to fulfill one’s duty
G-d revealed through separate beings—giving us our own ego so that we can choose to  serve Him

Partzuf(im) – פרצוף, פרצופים
Definition:
1. Various configurations of the 10 Sefiros, where all 10 harmonize to accomplish a single task (usually focused on one sefirah). 
2. Various roles, modes, or tasks that require a certain perspective or focus.
3. Literally: faces.
Table of the six general partzufim:
Name
Translation
Mashal
Nimshal
Atik Yomin
Ancient Days
Pleasure, leisure, fun
Everything is G-d
Arich Anpin
Long Face
Desire, life dreams
Everything is G-d’s Will (but separate from Him)
Aba
Father
Creativity
Everything is formed according to Gd’s Wisdom, and so in essence we are all the same and united (but within the basic boundaries of the world)
Ima
Mother
Logic
Everything is separated into distinct entities according to G-d’s Logic, and so we are all different, but must work together for a common goal.
Zeir Anpin
Small Face
Emotions
Everything experiences Gd according to its nature and its unique Avodah of love and fear.
Nukvah
Female
Expression in thought, speech, and action
Everything experiences Gd according to the limits of time and space. In some times and places G-d is revealed. In other times and places G-d is hidden. Therefore, we must choose to serve G-d, which requires sacrifice.
Parsa / Masach – פרסא / מסך
Definition:
1. The barrier that hides G-dliness from creation, separating between a higher level and a lower one, especially between the worlds of Atzilus and Beriyah. 
2. The expression of an idea in a tangible form, such as a mashal, that makes the idea accessible to a student, but hides the full depth of the idea. 
3. Literally: curtain, partition. Especially a partition separating a king from the common folk.
Kelipah – קליפה
Definition:
1. Something that conceals G-dliness so completely that it becomes a distraction or barrier to G-dliness. 
2. Ego and self-centered desires when viewed as one’s identity and priority in life. 
3. Literally: shell, peel. 
4. Also referred to as Sitra Achara (The Other Side, that is, the side that opposes holiness) and Chitzonim (external motives, outside of holiness).
Name
Translation
Mashal
Nimshal
Kelipas Nogah
Shiny shell
Edible peel.
Bodily desires necessary to sustain life, such as food and sleep. Self-awareness that motivates one to excel.
Shalosh Kelipos Hatemeios
Three impure shells
Hard inedible shell, like that of a nut.
Damaging and destructive desires, such as activities forbidden by Torah, and addictions. Self-awareness expressed in haughtiness and arrogance.

